Blog posts for DataFusion 5.0.0 and Ballista 0.5.0 (#140)
apache/arrow-site: _posts/2021-08-18-ballista-0.5.0.md

distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

Ballista extends DataFusion to provide support for distributed queries. This is the first release of Ballista since 
the project was [donated](https://arrow.apache.org/blog/2021/04/12/ballista-donation/) to the Apache Arrow project 
and includes 80 commits from 11 contributors.

```
git shortlog -sn 4.0.0..5.0.0 ballista/rust/client ballista/rust/core ballista/rust/executor ballista/rust/scheduler
  27  Andy Grove
  15  Jiayu Liu
  12  Andrew Lamb
   8  Ximo Guanter
   6  Daniël Heres
   5  QP Hou
   2  Jorge Leitao
   1  Javier Goday
   1  K.I. (Dennis) Jung
   1  Mike Seddon
   1  sathis
```

<!--
$ git log --pretty=oneline 4.0.0..5.0.0 ballista/rust/client ballista/rust/core ballista/rust/executor ballista/rust/scheduler ballista-examples/ | wc -l
80
-->

The release notes below are not exhaustive and only expose selected highlights of the release. Many other bug fixes 

> and improvements have been made: we refer you to the complete changelog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and improvements have been made: we refer you to the [complete changelog](https://github.com/apache/arrow-datafusion/blob/5.0.0/ballista/CHANGELOG.md).
```

# Performance and Scalability

Ballista is now capable of running complex SQL queries at scale and supports scalable distributed joins. We have been 
benchmarking using individual queries from the TPC-H benchmark at scale factors up to 1000 (1 TB). When running against 
CSV files, performance is generally very close to DataFusion, and significantly faster in some cases due to the fact 
that the scheduler limits the number of concurrent tasks that run at any given time. Performance against large Parquet 

> datasets is currently poor due to some issues ([#867](https://github.com/apache/arrow-datafusion/issues/867), 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
datasets is currently non ideal due to some issues ([#867](https://github.com/apache/arrow-datafusion/issues/867), 
```
